Great.

So just to confirm, do I have your permission to record this interview?

Yes.

Wonderful.

Okay, so we're just going to start off with some background, some simple questions, and then we'll get into the deeper stuff.

So in what state are you currently working?

Illinois.

All right.

And what is the highest level of education you have reached so far?

Associates.

Okay.

For how many years have you been working with clients?

Three, almost four years.

I'll go with four.

And in what settings do you deliver therapy?

Clinic-based.

What credentials do you hold from the BACB?

RBT.

I'm going for my BCBA.

Great.

That was my next question.

Do you plan to become a BCBA?

Cool.

All right.

So yeah, like I mentioned, we're definitely interested in whether RBTs are treated and paid fairly for the work that they do.

So if you don't mind my asking, what was your starting salary in your very first position as an RBT?

16 an hour.

And did you receive health insurance in that position?

No.

Okay.

And what is your current salary?

It's a 40K a year salary.

And does that have health insurance now?

Yes.

Okay.

How many hours a week do you work in total, considering all the clients that you see?

I have about 32 direct hours and eight for documentation.

Okay.

Right.

So considering an average client, how many hours per week would you work with him?

Depending on the client, I would probably work with each anywhere from nine to 12 hours a week.

Great.

And how many clients are you currently working with?

Sorry, let me count.

About four or five that I see regularly.

And then for people who call off, I also help out.

Okay.

So when people are like out sick, you'll take care of their clients?

Yeah.

Just taking a note.

Okay.

Cool.

So do you feel like that's a, I mean, five clients is a lot.

Does that create any challenges for you?

Actually, not really.

I used to have 12 clients at one point.

So, yeah.

So four to five is definitely manageable for me, especially if I'm seeing them every day.

Like, So I'm just curious to hear 12 clients is definitely on the high end.

Was that at a different clinic?

Or?

Yeah, that was a different clinic.

The one that was making 16 an hour at which?

Yeah, not really worth it.

Yeah, well, I hope you're at a better clinic now.

But I am certainly very interested in your experiences at the first clinic as well.

So considering an average client, maybe I'll ask about both clinics if you can answer.

So when he first starts at the clinic, how many months or years will he spend getting treatment before graduating?

Do you have a sense of that?

I really don't because it all depends on which letter I have for which client.

I would say I work with very much high behavior clients who have a lot of aggression, SID.

So those clients, I think, have a goal of at least one to two years, whereas I've definitely had clients who are out in like six months, depending on their ability level.

So I was saying we're from six months to two years.

Six months to two years of depending on the severity of the behaviors and the ability of the client.

Yeah.

OK, I'll just take a minute.

Some have mentioned that turnover at their clinic is very high because people are getting burned out from long hours and various other explanations on average.

So how many weeks, months, years to stay at the clinic where you were first at?

At my first clinic, we had a pretty strong team, I would say.

So a lot of them stayed.

I would say like there were like three that stayed, including myself, for more than a year.

And then we would have maybe part timers come in and leave like every three months or so.

And what about your current clinic?

At my current clinic, I've only been working there for six months, so I've only seen one person leave so far, but that was because the visa was up.

So it wasn't necessarily.

They would have stayed if they could.

You would say that the current clinic doesn't seem to have a problem with turnover?

No, not really.

Do you have a sense sort of more generally of the field if there is a concerning level of burnout and start turnover?

I would say yes.

There is.

I've worked at three clinics so far.

The first clinic was the worst one I've worked at.

The one that I left was just too far away from my job.

And after the holidays, I started working at my current one now.

But I would say a lot of people get burnt out because two reasons really that I see is lack of training and lack of appreciation for what we as RBTs do.

Yeah.

Yeah.

So like we're always the ones getting hurt and having to work the hours with a kiddo who might not even respond half the time.

And that can really burn some people out.

And yeah, I think this field needs to change in the way that they treat RBTs.

Yeah.

Yeah.

That's one of the big things that came out of this.

When I started this project, like I said, it was really just kind of let's just go ask some questions, see what's happening.

And pretty quickly, lots of problems with RBTs emerged and we sort of just retooled.

And we're like, all right, let's really dig into what's going on with the RBTs given how important they are in this ecosystem, given that they are often 90, 95% of the therapy is delivered from the RBT.

Like we need to know what's going on with the RBTs.

So if I could summarize your explanation for the burnout is lack of preparation in terms of training, and then also just not knowing what you're getting yourself into.

So perhaps they turn up at the clinic and now they've got kids who have perhaps some aggressions or serious self injurious behaviors.

And they're just like, what am I doing here?

Exactly.

I've heard that from so many people over the years.

I had no clue what I was getting into when I started here.

And they saw that it was essentially babysitting when it really isn't.

Yeah.

All right.

So you've worked at three clinics.

At the first clinic, generally speaking, did you feel respected?

I felt respected by my BCBAs and stuff like that.

But as far as the company goes as a whole, like my direct supervisors were always appreciative of what I did.

However, how the company treated RBTs in terms of pay, health care plans, retirement plans, even was naive and close to what it should be for the hours that we worked.

Yeah.

And the challenging things that you were being asked to do.

Right.

My next clinic, Amy, a little bit better than I am now.

However, I was not paid for cancellations.

So if a client canceled, I wouldn't have any money from that.

And I would say they were a little bit unethical in terms of at least my personal ethics when it comes to certain behaviors, such as stemming and things like that.

So and then the clinic ended up flooding.

So it seemed like a good time for me to just leave.

Okay.

Yeah.

I'm definitely going to ask about some of the behaviors and stuff.

So, yeah, I'm very, very keen to hear about what you experienced there.

Just before we get onto that, I'm going to ask a bit about training and education and then we'll move on to the behaviors.

So both the training and education provided by the BACB and by your very first supervisor, do you think you were prepared well for your first day working with clients?

So for my first day, I did not feel prepared whatsoever.

It was all online through Relias.

I'm sure you've heard that one.

Well, I did spend some time with a RBT trainer in a room.

There wasn't a whole lot of time and they threw me on a client within my first week working there.

So what's that client like?

Very high behaviors.

So a lot of it was just pairing for me and just trying to get to know them.

But I had worked in other fields with kids with autism, so I kind of knew what to do and I knew what I was getting into, but I could see from my other coworkers that they just did not.

Do you believe most RBTs have enough training to work with clients who might be nonverbal, noncompliant or self-injurious?

No, I'm still learning about SIB and stuff like there are so many.

It's so complicated on why it happens and when it does.

I can't imagine doing the same thing to somebody else.

And that just stinks overall for one, not just the client, but for the quality of care that the clinic gives as well, which I really care about.

Yeah, yeah.

Yeah, I'm definitely going to want to ask you more about that just before that.

So did the training ever discuss the potential for harm or abuse in ABA?

And what I mean by that is both harm to the RBTs themselves, but also to the clients.

And what did they ever talk about the ways in which ABA can go wrong and lead to that sort of thing?

So my first clinic did not, but that was over four years ago.

I didn't notice in the past two clinics that they did discuss that, which is good.

I'm glad to see that happening now because one of the first things I did after getting the job was just look up.

I just typed in ABA into my phone on Google and said, is ABA abusive?

And I started freaking out.

Am I doing something wrong?

But then I had to sit down and talk with my BCBA.

And like, no, these are the things that you're not supposed to do.

These are the things that you are supposed to do.

We try to follow the ethics as much as we can.

And that made me feel better.

A lot of ways.

Has that anxiety ever returned after seeing what's happening in the clinic?

Of course.

I always try to think about anytime there's a tantrum, like, am I doing things the right way?

Or any sort of high level behavior?

Like, am I doing things the right way?

Am I being ethical enough?

Am I giving them enough time, enough space?

And I'm sure there are a lot of other clinics that never taught that to our BTs either.

So and I really, my current clinic really does Greg Hanley's work a lot and universal protocol.

So yeah.

Yeah.

It sounds like you've settled at somewhere that's like going to be among the better clinics for sure.

I've heard just absolute horror stories.

So I'm glad to hear you've found somewhere like that.

So thinking generally, not just about this good place that you've landed, do you feel like the training that most RBTs get would provide adequate protection against the potential abuse of clients?

I think so abuse of clients or abused from clients.

Let's maybe do both.

Let's start with of clients.

So for the abuse of clients, I would say I was saying like maybe 50%.

I think you get a good idea of why it's allowed and what isn't allowed.

You know, just by and just through the interview process, as certain at the companies I've been at and also just like a lot of people are moms or love things like that.

So they have a good understanding of that stuff.

I would say though, for safety care training, that seems to be not there as much.

And I think the main reason is that clinics lose money when you have a day set for safety care, which is true.

Like you spend an entire day working on it, but at the end of the day, we're providing better care.

So.

So are you thinking something like CPI, sort of crisis prevention?

How do you think about things like how do you do a hold on a kid where it won't injure the child, you know, if they're if they're a danger to themselves or to others or to you?

I am very against any sorts of restraints, personally.

Being someone who was hospitalized for suicidal thoughts and depression, like being in that situation does not help a client.

The only time I could ever see it being done correctly is if they were in complete danger to themselves.

Yeah, that's that's what those are the cases I'm thinking of.

I heard, yeah, you told me a story.

They had this child who, you know, very high aggression, very serious, self injurious behaviors and a lot of headbanging, you know, into the floor.

But not just, you know, you get a bump, like you get blood.

And I don't know what exactly triggered the client.

I can't recall exactly.

But, you know, the client starts with this behavior and, you know, they're trying the standard, put the mat in between the child's head and then the child turns to biting himself, you know, to the drawing blood point.

And and yeah, she they didn't have permission to hold the child.

So they just had to like let him they were like the less dangerous behavior is the biting.

So we'll just they're like put him in a sort of sort of room with padded walls type thing and just wait for someone to come who was able to deal with that situation.

And I was like, I share your feelings strongly.

Yeah, but I was also like, yeah, in those circumstances, there was there should have been someone there who was trained and prepared to deal with that situation.

So, yeah.

Yeah.

So what would you add, if anything, to the training?

I mean, to protect the RBTs, to protect the clients, what would you do?

I would scrap all of the online training, to be honest, and just be straight in a classroom for two weeks and really, really not just work on like slide shows, because I actually have practicing and observing other RBTs.

So and same with the safety care, like not just looking at slideshows, let's actually practice it.

I haven't been through CPI.

I've done another one called PCM.

I'm actually getting trained in CPI later this week.

But yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

All right.

So that is certainly giving me something to think about.

How much of the training is taking place online?

Because from an outsider's perspective, I mean, so I'm a teacher and I teach way less challenging sort of things than how to work with kids like this.

And I can tell you when we went on to Zoom for COVID, I felt like I couldn't.

It was virtually pointless.

I'm trying to understand how an online training could possibly prepare someone for this work.

What's going on there?

So since it's a certification that goes anywhere, like you can take that to any, you can take your RBT certification to any company you want.

Some companies might pay for the test for you.

Other companies might pay for the entire training, you too, you know, but there are some that don't as well.

So, so a lot of it is you have 40 hours of training outside of work, sitting on a computer, and nobody wants to do that.

So they just sit there, put on Netflix and click through it and then Google the answers at the end of the test.

Right.

Today they can go on to chat GPT to get the answers.

Exactly.

Yikes.

Yeah.

I see why your first suggestion then is let's get everyone in a classroom.

Let's get everyone in person.

Yeah.

And also then you can role play, you know, how do you interact with clients and you can shadow and, you know, right.

Makes a lot of sense.

All right.

So let's talk a little bit about the supervision you've received from your BCBAs.

Have you always been satisfied by the quality of your supervision?

Yeah, actually, I've always been able to ask my BCBAs to model things for me to help me out in a crisis situation, or just even explain how to run a program or why we're doing this program versus a different one.

I feel like the BCBAs in the field are very, very good.

But the companies that work for ABA aren't always the best.

Yeah, yeah, for sure.

I certainly haven't heard like everyone has been satisfied by the quality of their supervision.

So also what you just said about them providing the explanation, the rationale to make you understand the type, you know, the targets that you're trying to achieve and all of that.

That sounds so important.

Does that include all of the clinics and BCBAs that you've worked with?

Yes.

I don't always receive an explanation on something.

And most of the time I end up just like finding out through the Gary and find that it's because it was something that a parent requested or something like that.

So they can't really comment on it.

Or for whatever reason, that info is just privatized.

I would like to share my friends experience with one bad BCBA.

So that's okay.

Absolutely.

So that so my friends like 32 years old female, the BCBA was also female, but she would like, she would prompt you like you would a client.

So even going as far to do physical hand over hand type things.

So to teach you how to learn things and, and while she wasn't my supervisor directly or anything, she still had like, Do you mean so she would take her hands onto yours and move your body?

Yeah, exactly.

Okay.

I'm, I'm sort of confused what the, what was going on there.

What is honestly, this is a lot of secondhand too.

I'm a little confused myself.

But she would do things like that.

And then when my friend went to play the clinic supervisor, he would, nothing was done about it.

Like she was basically being sexually harassed and physically abused by this BCBA and nothing changed about it.

And that was the last clinic I worked at.

So that was the second one.

Yeah.

Harassment and abuse go further than sort of hands on hands.

Was it worse than that?

I think it was because there were times when my friend would call me crying and say, Oh, she touched me today and things like that.

And it was, Oh boy.

Yeah.

So she took that to the director of the clinic.

And they didn't do anything.

Wow.

Why do you think that is?

I have no clue.

I, I want to believe my friend a hundred percent here, just because of the way that she was like, she was jumpy all the time at work and things like that.

And I had worked with her at the first clinic as well.

So like her personality definitely like changed.

Yeah.

So, I mean, that's certainly some major red flags.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Wow.

Were there any other stories you wanted to share?

I can think of times when I seen, so I really want to avoid at the last clinic, I seen RBCs and BCBAs stop kids from hand flapping or non harmful stimming.

And it would always make it worse too.

So I don't understand why even putting in the intervention because you can't even stop it.

Like you can't get rid of autism.

Like that's not the goal of ABA.

And it bothers me.

And that bothered me so much because you're taking away those kids personalities and making them into robots.

So that was another reason why I left the last one.

Have you spent any time, I'm guessing you have listening to like autistic people, like there are some people like interviews on YouTube where they, who received ABA as children, and they talk about being, you know, forced to look people in the eyes, even though that was really experienced as very distressing, you know, not being allowed to do hand flapping or other like non, you know, hair twirling or, you know, even just playing with a ribbon or something.

They talk about that.

And I'm, I'm sort of just wondering why would anyone want to control those behaviors, which are harmless and which you can see a lot of people have told me, you know, when they talk about, you know, the behaviors getting amplified, they often say what, what the antecedent of that, of that behavior becoming amplified is, is often making the kid do something, which it's just like, why did the kid even need to do that in the first place?

Like, why was that important?

You know what I mean?

Exactly.

And that's what universal protocol is about too, is really looking at those precursor behaviors before K gets to like crisis mode, and saying, okay, cool.

You know, you don't want to do this right now.

Let's go.

You know, we can play for a little bit longer.

And really listening to clients.

And yes, I have heard those stories about that as well.

And a lot of the times too, I feel like sometimes parents have a big influence on Oh, my kid is doing this and it doesn't look normal.

Right?

Yeah, I was wondering how much that could be playing a role.

Do you want to talk a bit more about that?

Yeah, I've definitely had parents say to me, oh, can you get them to stop scripting?

Or can you get them to stop doing that?

And I have to say no, because it's unethical, obviously.

And, you know, I'm an RBT too.

I don't have that kind of power to even implement something like that.

That's all to the BCBA.

But I know what my BCBA would say.

No, that would be no.

And, and it just really, really saddens me.

Because I for one have a cousin who has Down syndrome.

I've met, I've had a, I used to have a friend, he just ended up moving away who had autism.

He never went through ABA or anything, but I knew him for like, 10 years, like, just how they are really just upsets me that I feel like we could do a lot better sometimes in the parent education of things.

And not be afraid to teach them that, hey, like, hey, it's okay that they stem it's okay that they're hand slapping, it's not harmful to them.

Like, yeah, and it's, and it's okay, if they don't look directly into your eyes, you know?

Oh, yeah, I don't.

I have PTSD.

So that's the one symptom that I kind of share with the kids.

Like, I can't look anybody in the eyes or anything like that.

Like, I don't make it.

I don't even see that as a program anymore.

In the past two clinics, like it might be getting calling their name to get their attention.

But they don't have to look at me straight in the eye.

We can just like stop what they're doing or whatever else.

Or I like how about like, look at my ear, like just turn your body to face me or, you know, we don't need to be exactly eyes all the time.

Exactly.

Like, and I get so worried that other companies are doing this stuff.

They are.

They definitely are.

Yeah, I don't have the numbers right in front of me at the moment.

But I will tell you up the number of you know, every time I asked them, so do you work on so so with you?

I haven't gone through all the standard questions because you're obviously like a very reflective, thoughtful person.

But, you know, sometimes I'll get RVTs calling who are not really reflective at all.

And I'll just go through the questions.

So we asked them, do you ever work to suppress or modify stimming?

I would guess it's got to be at least three quarters who say, yeah.

Really?

At least I can hang on.

Let me see if I get the I can get the actual just it's like a running telly.

I just have to load this up.

That's very scary thought.

Oh, yeah.

It's it's been pretty wild, to tell you the truth.

I had no I'm a philosophy professor, you know, like I work in psychology and cognitive science, but I had no idea what we were going to find with with this project, you know, and one of the things I'm certainly now thinking a lot about is what should we do with what we've learned?

Because the plan originally is write an academic paper, which, of course, virtually no one will read.

And I realized we're talking about a population of like vulnerable children.

And now we're sitting on, you know, a lot of RVTs are calling us as whistleblowers, basically, you know, they're like, I am being told a person told me almost in tears that she is required to do things that she regards as unethical every day.

And when she complains, they write a document and make her sign it, which threatens to fire.

I have no reason to believe this woman was lying to me.

Why?

She didn't tell me what the clinic's name was.

She didn't.

She sounded deeply, deeply troubled.

And, you know, like, what what am I meant to do with this information?

Do we try and write an article for like popular press to try and like, how do we try and get parents to start talking about this?

You know, what do we do?

I don't know.

You know, I think the best thing to do is, yeah, just put it out there.

I would love to see something like that and have statistics like that, because we always hear about it, but I never see any numbers with it.

Like, I always believe what I hear because I know I've seen it.

But yeah, I'm just trying to scan.

Scan it so I can look at what the numbers are now.

So in terms of how many people think the training is sufficient, it's under 20% feel that they were given sufficient training.

I'm just trying to get up to stimming.

Oh, well, I'm not sure if I'm we also have had a question in there about whether ABA could help children without autism.

Like, would you use this with neurotypical kids?

And when we were asking that question, 100% said yes.

So in how satisfied are you by the quality of your supervision?

Under one third say yes.

How many hours do you meet with your BCBA?

I can't it's like a bunch of numbers, but there's plenty like, you know, every once one hour a month, which I believe is below the supervision requirements in lots of these cases.

It's 5%.

So depending on whether you're in home or clinic based, it can definitely be.

Yeah, yeah.

Different.

Yeah.

So stimming.

All right.

So on this page, I have eight who gave your response and 30 who said, yes, we work on stimming.

And then there's a follow up question.

What is your goal?

So to reduce it, no extinction is one person answered.

Another one says to fit in with the mass, which I assume means like with society, to get the child to do a task for a long time, to make them more appear more normal.

There's also some stimming behaviors, which is self injurious.

So some people say so they don't injure themselves.

You know, it's like all over the shop, but yeah, there you go.

The majority, a large majority say yes, they work on stimming.

And now I'll tell you about eye contact because I want to hear your reactions.

So for eye contact, I have 25 saying yes and six saying no and three saying other.

So let's call it 28 yeses and six noes for eye contact.

That's horrible.

Yeah.

And I'm like, I think we really need to be talking about this because it's a huge number of people.

It's really substantial.

I think a lot of it comes from us internally of not wanting to think that we are being abusive.

We don't want to think that we aren't.

We want to think that we're not being abusive when we are.

And I think self reflection is such a big, important part of this field.

It needs to happen.

I think you had another question earlier.

I think it was like the second question you said.

About protecting against abuses or training.

There was something else that you were just listing down with all the numbers.

Oh, right.

I wanted to know about the, what have I seen on the other questions?

So what questions have I asked?

The last ones I had was satisfaction with supervision.

Does that include all the BCBAs you've worked with?

And before that, I asked you about the training provided by the BCBA and your first supervisor prepare you to work with kids from the first day?

Less than, for what it's worth, less than one in seven people say yes to that.

What about other RBTs?

Do you believe most RBTs have enough training to work with clients who may be nonverbal, noncompliant or injuring themselves?

I only have four people who have said yes to that.

Did the training, the education ever discuss the potential for harm or abuse?

I can count on one hand, the number of people who say yes to that.

So yeah, that's where we're at.

Okay.

Nevermind then.

I thought I heard something else that I was thinking about.

Well, in the fall when we have our report written up, if you give me permission, I'll ask you about your permissions to what I can do with your information at the end.

But if you do give me permission to keep your email address on file, then in the fall, I can send you a copy of the report.

And, you know, at that time, if you have thoughts or observations that you want to share with me, I'd love to connect again and to hear your reactions.

Of course, I think I would also like to talk about the...

So I think we have a tendency to...

I think occupational therapy, speech therapy and ABA therapy are often...

Oh no, that's what it was.

You said working with other kids with other disabilities besides autism.

Yeah.

Yes, I do with modifications.

I think ADHD could be another huge one that we could work on because 30 to 80% of kids with autism, like already diagnosed, end up being diagnosed with ADHD as well.

I've worked with kids with a lot of dual diagnoses.

So whether that be being deaf and have autism, there's always some sort of autism in there.

I think that's just part of how health insurance will pay for it here in Illinois.

But I feel like we could expand our reach to ADHD and provide reinforcement and understanding there as well.

Like so much I see is like I have a current client with ADHD and I see this is only my client too.

So I only see them most of the time.

But if I'm out sick or if I have to go be with another client because I'm just more trained, whatever else, I see them go so, so fast.

When that client needs to go a little bit slower so they can process the information.

So I think there needs to be a little bit more research into how ABA affects kids with dual diagnoses and what are better practices for those kids with dual diagnoses.

Yeah, that seems like a really important point.

I also, so one thing I've noticed looking at the academic research on ABA, it's very, very common for ABA and the BACB.

And I've reached out to like the sort of high priests and priestesses of ABA in academia.

And one thing they're always just, it's almost like an ideology is like, we are doing science.

This is objective science and we are the evidence-based people.

And I'm like, that does make me, I am a scientist.

Like I definitely do that.

And I have enough competence, I think, to look at pretty much any literature and have some sense of it.

The first thing I noticed was the inclusion, which kids are actually included in the studies for ABA.

Usually they are verbal.

They can already communicate in the studies.

There are virtually no studies with non-verbal kids.

And yet when I ask the RBTs that I've spoken to, what percentage of your clients are non-verbal?

So I hear numbers, you know, going up to nearly all, but commonly half, you know, we're not, we're talking about really profoundly autistic kids.

And as far as I can tell, there is no really rigorous evidence on how kids like that respond to this theory, much less kids with dual diagnoses, much less kids who are perhaps in abusive situations in their home, much less kids who are perhaps experiencing poverty, much like, you know, like we just don't know.

Yeah.

That's what I've noticed as well.

And I've definitely worked with all of those popular kids.

So, yeah.

And that really, four out of the five kids I work with are non-verbal.

And I say I've been lucky because I've worked with Speech and OT and see how they prompt kids who are non-verbal, especially speech.

If they have an AAC device, our prompting for ABA should stop.

So, do you know, like, least and most prompting for kids?

No.

So it's vocal.

So like you verbally tell them, gestural.

So you gesture to it.

Modeling.

So you model it for them.

So you do it yourself to show them how to do it.

Partial physical.

So that one can be a little bit tricky, but it basically means you are, like, if you were teaching a kid how to hand wash, you might, like, take up their hands and start rubbing them together and then take your hands away.

And then full physical would be like, grabbing their hand and doing it for them.

Whereas if you have a kid, and this is been, this is very common in speech too, is if you have an AAC, you're supposed to model it for them or gesture to it.

No partial physical, no physical prompting.

It's proven to be less effective.

But I've seen, but I've seen RBTs and even BCBAs have it in their programming to full physical and have them touch it with their hands.

Right.

Right.

So I think we need to, I think even though there are a lot of companies who have speech therapy and occupational therapy in the same building, I don't see the collaboration as much as an RBT.

And I think we can learn everything from if we all work together.

Yeah.

I couldn't agree more.

It's cool that you have speech and OT in the same building.

There are plenty of RBTs I've spoken to that have no real awareness that speech therapy or occupational therapy are a thing.

And it's a question actually that I usually ask is, do you think that other treatment modalities could be important for autistic children?

And a lot of them just don't know that there are other treatments, which is kind of concerning.

But, you know, I believe the BACB, maybe not the BACB, but it's one of the like white papers that defines ABA therapy.

And it literally has a line in it.

It's like, what is ABA?

It's like, ABA is a natural science.

ABA, yada, yada.

What is ABA not?

And one of the lines I swear is ABA is not just another therapy for autism.

As in ABA is the therapy for autism.

And I'm kind of like, well, ABA is a science of behavior.

And it's a very sophisticated, you can go look at the Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis and they have article after article after article about how can we subtly shape behavior using different kinds of reinforcers and different kinds of programs.

But they aren't publishing on a deeper medical psychological understanding of autism.

They're not experts of autism, right?

Like that's not what ABA is.

But a lot of the people that I talked to seem not to be aware of that.

They seem not to know that.

Well, and I don't know if you've heard of this company.

I've never worked there, so I feel comfortable sharing with it.

There's a company called The Place for Children with Autism.

I have not heard of that one, no.

I've heard so many people be so critical of that name.

Because and they do ABA therapy there.

They only do ABA there?

They only do ABA.

So I'm right.

I say the place.

Right?

Yeah.

Yeah.

Right.

Right.

Yeah.

And it's like, like, why are we naming ourselves this when we're not the only therapy and when therapies work better in conjunction with one another as well?

It's a great question.

I see physical therapy and OT is working so closely together all the time.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Do you have like, what is it about ABA, the history or the it sort of feels to me like more than just it's not like, you know, cognitive behavioral therapy or dialectical behavior.

You know, they definitely have their take on things.

And maybe even you could describe it as a kind of ideology.

But when I come and look at ABA, it really seems like something, something kind of thicker, ideologically thicker, almost.

I don't know if you have a reaction or thought about that.

I would say yes.

Like, I think we're like, I think we call out our patients a lot more.

What do you mean by that?

So, like in CBT, you're kind of just like sitting there, you might talk a little bit, you know, you go into patient space.

For ABA, some of the clients are so unmotivated, that you need to make that motivation for them.

And especially the ones who are nonverbal, because especially in the communication aspect, like, oh, I've learned to get what I want, just by crying, or get what I want by hitting other people or slapping others.

So, again, it's reinforced that way.

And whereas some neurotypical, more neurotypical people would realize, like, oh, they're getting angry at me, or things like that, and switch their behavior.

A lot of those cases don't have any concept of other people's emotions, or even other people.

So, I would say, like, the one thing that we always work on is motivation.

If I hear ABA, I think motivation.

And I think that should be what ABA is.

Yeah, it's really rigorous.

And you can sort of think of it like Pavlov's dogs, you know, kind of idea, but a little bit more complicated, because we're dealing with humans, we're not dealing with dogs.

So...

Yeah, yeah, I wonder, you know, one of the things actually that drew me to ABA was in my interest in human motivation.

And so I come from a very, very different perspective.

Like, I didn't actually know that sort of behaviorist science in the sense of like, you know, certainly Pavlov and Skinner and Watson and those people did very rigorous science.

You know, Skinner did incredible things with pigeons and rats and Pavlov's dogs and all that.

But I didn't know that that was...

I knew there was a period in, you know, the early 20th century, and really into the sort of cognitive revolution where behaviorism was overturned, that that was being used to inform various kinds of treatments for children, including disabled children.

Lovaas, of course, is in the 70s.

But I didn't actually know that this survived anywhere else today.

And so I was just amazed, because from the area that I come from in cognitive psychology, sort of our best theory of motivation is known as self-determination theory.

And it says there are basically three ingredients to producing motivation.

One of them is a sense of mastery or competence.

It's something you know that you can do.

It's within your suite of capacities.

It's not futile.

Another one is connectedness or belonging, feeling like you're part of some sort of bigger thing that's really profoundly motivating.

We find that consistently associated with high levels of motivation.

And the third and the one that interests me the most is autonomy.

The sense that you're acting for your own reasons, that there's something inside of you that's directing your behavior and you're not just responding to sort of contingencies in the environment.

Right.

And those three things are, I mean, so SDT, self-determination theory is extremely well evidenced.

I was just doing a literature review and I counted like, I think it was like a quarter of a million participants in the largest meta-analysis of these studies.

I mean, it's huge.

And, and I was, you know, that's why I heard about ABA.

And I was so interested, like I had reinforcers.

So with neurotypical children, one of the most reliable experimental findings is that if you reward them for doing something intrinsically interesting, like for instance, drawing, then when you remove the reward, they cease to be motivated to draw.

It's a really, there's been a whole string of, you know, dozens of studies that look at like one of the best ways to undermine a child's motivation for things that are naturally interesting is to pay them or reward them in some way.

So when I heard about ABA, I was like, wait, that's really contrary to what we've learned about neurotypical children.

What would be the connection with neuroatypical children?

And the answer is, you don't have a ton of research on that, but the little research that we have suggests autonomy, mastery, and belongingness are also deeply important to developmentally disabled children, maybe more so.

And so that was like the sort of more meta angle at which I was coming in.

I don't usually talk to interviewees about this, obviously, but since you're a thoughtful guy, I'm thinking about all this stuff.

But yeah, that's where I came just from a totally different world.

And I was like, wow, that's, you know, if those were neurotypical kids, we sort of know what would happen.

What would be, what should we infer about autistic kids?

Yeah.

So, yeah, part of it is actually is the idea of fading reinforcers.

So I might, at one point, if I'm teaching them how to do hands, to wash their hands, I'm going to, after they've mastered it, I'm going to start fading back myself and not give them the reward for it.

But I might say, okay, cool, we washed our hands, let's go do something else.

But I'm still not gonna be like, oh, wow, great job, dude, high five, like, like, and I think, I don't think we completely removed the reinforcement.

But we definitely faded back a lot.

Because that's because there are no, because then there's no natural reinforcers occurring.

Right.

And the other thing is, is that ABA looks at what the behavior looks like, rather than what does it feel like.

So, and I've actually seen what it looks like, really how kids, kids with autism with their anger, because what does it look like when somebody's angry at you?

What do you look like when you're angry at somebody else?

Because you're not telling yourself internally to stop.

So what can you look at to stop yourself from continuing on?

So, and I think, especially for some of those higher functioning kiddos, I know we've moved away from higher functioning, lower functioning, but just to give you an idea.

I haven't found better language to, I feel like we've lost a lot of ways to talk about, like, we're not meant to talk about mental age either.

But it's a very helpful sort of heuristic.

I've spent time with five year olds who are neurotypical.

So I kind of have a reference point, you know?

Yeah.

So, where was I?

For those kiddos, I might recommend that they go to counseling as well.

Yeah.

Because to work on those internal things, and this more sensory part of it, because four functions of behavior are, you know, access of tangibles, et cetera, et cetera.

I'm sure you know them.

Yeah.

So.

So I think we're a little bit of a follow up there.

I know I've already taken over an hour of your time.

I'm really grateful for that.

It's been extremely interesting.

And you've given me just a ton to think about.

But if you don't mind, I just wanted to ask a couple of follow ups there.

So when you're fading the reinforcers, you're trying to, so the idea is previously the action or the behavior or whatever was motivated by some kind of reinforcer that you had provided or engineered in some way.

And now you've got this thing, you're like, okay, I've trained the kid.

They're going to do it in the presence of the reinforcer.

But of course, the reinforcer isn't going to be there.

So I need to now make them somehow really.

So when you, yeah, I guess my question is, how do you think about fading?

Is it just trying like more sort of behaviorist reinforce right.

Or is it like, cause the thing that would make the fading work intuitively is the kid understands the purpose of the behavior, right?

Like they no longer need to be given a purpose because they have internalized it.

But like talking about their minds, their internal mental states is not really something ABA focuses on, of course, because of its behaviorist roots.

So I'm kind of just confused.

Like how do you even conceptualize fading?

Um, yeah, so I guess the idea would be to event.

Hopefully internally that they are reinforcing themselves.

Or I guess another part of it would be, it's part of their routine.

So I go to the bathroom, I need to wash my hands afterwards.

Like they might not always like it.

And especially new sensory issues, like, we don't necessarily always work on hand washing.

It might just be putting on hand sanitizer and going like, um, but I think it's more about building that routine and as well.

And then I might, because we do a lot of bathrooming stuff in ABA, um, potty training, things like that.

Because if you think about it, like when you were getting potty trained, did you continue to get reinforcement after you were potty trained?

Everyone.

I think the only way you can train kids to potty training is with reinforcers, right?

Everyone does that when they're that age.

Right.

But you don't get it afterwards.

Like, I don't say good job.

He went to the bathroom.

Well done.

Well done, Simon.

Um, so yeah, so I feel like training is a very big part of it because we don't want to create robots either who just react to reinforcement.

We want them to be as independent as possible.

As far as having the kid understand, well, I feel like if the kid's never going to understand it, then what are we going to do then?

I think there needs to be a little bit more research about it still.

Oh yeah, absolutely.

I totally agree with that.

So I think, I think there is needs to, another thing is that we also look at ABC, so antecedent behavior consequence.

We will focus so much on consequence intervention.

And then this guy named Greg Hanley comes along and says, no, let's look at the antecedent.

So you might want to do research into Greg Hanley as well, because he's a big part of the new movement coming along.

So.

Yeah, I've, I've been, I started reading some of his stuff and I mean, at some point, um, I wonder if the field of ABA isn't just going to split.

Um, because while there are people like you for sure who have, but you, I think your disagreements with the old ABA, as though it's not a thing today, which it clearly is.

Um, I think your disagreements are so fundamental and rooted in a different conception of what a child is, what a person is, what development is.

My suspicion, if I had to bet is that the field is going to split and that the new ABA people will give themselves a new name.

Probably that would be my guess.

Um, yeah, I would think so too.

That's where it seems like it's going.

It seems like we're either Greg Hanley or we're not.

And I, I have to go with anywhere people.

I mean, I'm 24.

I've, I guess I'm very much been taught the new way versus the old way.

And the old way just kind of discuss, discuss me in some ways.

And not that the principles aren't there, but I think we're very much a transitionary period where who knows what's going to happen next.

Yeah.

It really feels that way.

Um, although it's very unclear to me that parents have any understanding of that sort of those deeper currents in the field.

I often feel they don't have a clue, but yeah.

I see parents treat us as a babysitting service as well.

Yeah.

Yeah.

And instead of actually realizing that therapy, do you think that that with like issues surrounding poverty?

Like, cause I think a lot of it has to do with if you have this kid with high behaviors and you send them into a normal neurotypical, um, daycare or elementary school with kids who are running around screaming, who barely has a good idea of who he can say whatever you want about our education system here, but barely has ability to learn through all that screaming, all those different kids, 30 different kids in the classroom.

You can't expect a kid with autism to be able to do the same stuff.

And then they end up getting kicked out of school.

Right.

Yeah.

Or they are too aggressive or, you know, teachers get overwhelmed by the self SIP.

Exactly.

I think we could do more in the school districts as well.

Um, I know of a few BCBAs who are going to work in school districts, uh, right now, which is going to be immensely helpful because now those little districts are paying for it.

Cause, um, maybe it's expensive.

I regularly see greater than a thousand dollars for a month of ABA therapy and the regular, depending on their insurance.

Um, yeah, yeah.

I've seen that too.

I think there's, um, one of the things I worry about is how, so this population of kids diagnosed with ASD is just ballooning, right?

Like it is just getting, it's overwhelming.

Every time the stats are updated, the new CDC estimate is just, it's inevitably meaningfully higher.

And I think one of the issues that we're having and part of my hypothesis about part of what we're seeing with really unqualified BTs and even RBTs who get virtually no training is that it's like a lot of, there's a lot of money to be made.

The biggest ABA clinics, a chain is worth $400 million.

And creating, you know, lots of these ABA clinics is very lucrative.

There's a huge demand for them.

And actually just training people who are truly competent to work with this population and to care for this, but you just can't do it that quickly.

And I don't know why, and that cheaply.

And I don't know, I don't know what's going to happen.

I feel like there's a, there's a really big crisis waiting.

Um, especially also for, you know, those, those really profoundly autistic kids who will never become independent.

They will never be able to live on their own.

And what, what happens when their parents die?

Right?

Like their parents are their caregivers, their financial advisors, their medical advice.

I mean, they are everything.

This state is not ready to provide those services.

No.

And, um, I can, as to that, I used to work for a special recreation association.

So I worked with some of those people, everyone's like, the thing about kids with autism is that they turn into adults with autism.

Like they're not going anywhere.

So, but I've seen the homes that they're put in and how run down they are compared to a regular nursing home.

And it makes me worried and wow, those kids.

So I do try to make them as independent as possible.

And even in self, I think another thing that we really teach, um, that I teach at least as much as I can is self advocacy a lot, because, um, who knows if they're going to say if somebody abuses them or things like that, I've had to call DCFS a few times.

And yeah.

And what triggered you to do that?

Well, um, feel free talking about this.

And it's been about two years since I've had to do it.

Um, which is ethics for ABA is two years, like before you can have contact with a client again, outside of ABA, um, is that, um, I had to call DCFS because they were putting her in a corner, sending her down and berating her consistently.

And, um, not only that they would get into fights, her and her dad would get into fights.

And this is a nine year old girl, like, she's like, no meat on her bones skinny as can be like, and she's just getting hit and whaled on every day.

So my BCBA and I decided to call DCFS.

And then I never saw her again.

So I have no clue what happened to her.

I hope she's okay.

But I hope I made the right call.

And nothing bad happened.

But another situation I saw was, is, I saw a lot of bruises where you wouldn't normally see them.

So like underneath the armpits, on top of the shoulders, like, very weird places, like almost like meant to be hidden.

I really don't know what happened to that.

Kid either.

They still went to the clinic.

At the end of the day.

I don't know if anything bad happened.

I just don't stop seeing bruises after that point.

So I'm glad something happened.

I think people in ABA are very caring, but sometimes our care is misplaced.

I do want to talk about how, too, is that the, how I've seen more women who are diagnosed with autism or girls who are diagnosed lately, and how, I don't really know if any research has been done on girls with autism versus boys with autism, because they are definitely different.

Yeah.

Yeah.

I think it's relatively a relatively new area.

Like there have certainly been studies there.

There've always been some girls with autism.

But now there seems to be this recognition that many more girls might have autism, but it would present somewhat differently.

Yeah.

Because girls are better at masking than guys is what the term is, is masking.

They're able to hide their symptoms better.

And then, but, You've been seeing that in the clinics?

Yeah.

Like, like for girls with autism, it's either that they're very, very much independent or nonverbal, can't do much.

Like there's not really that in between.

And even when I started, I would say there's like one to two girls that I ever had met with autism four years ago.

Now I've met like 15.

Yeah.

So we've gotten better at diagnosing them and now they can get the help that they need.

Yeah.

And I know that as an RBT as well, I'm part of a really low population because I'm male working in this field.

Exactly.

Yeah.

We almost hear like, it's got to be 90% of the people we interview are women.

Yeah.

So, and a lot of the, and we don't see a lot of RBTs who are male who are coming into this field either.

And I feel like it's so important, like, because, you know, guys like to play video games, they're more active and things like that.

And they can relate to kids with autism more.

Like I even had a kid the other day tell me, they want to be like me and become a therapist when they get older.

Like, that was so important to me that they recognize that like, not just women can be therapists and men can be too.

And that there are good males out there who can do this field.

And there definitely need to be more.

Yeah.

I'm definitely curious to hear more of your thoughts on that.

Why do you think, well, I guess one question is why do you think there are so few men, even relative to other female dominated fields, there are relatively few men practicing as RBTs and what do you think the problems that that induces are?

And yeah, what do you think about it?

So, the first clinic I worked at, we had actually switched companies because our company went under, so the clinic went to a different one.

But before we went to that new clinic, there was a statement that said, guys, if you are male, you cannot change a kid in the bathroom.

So, to me, that was just lean sexism, not just towards men, but towards women as well, because it says that only the women can do it.

Also, I think they're afraid of being called pedophiles and things like that, and being accused of things that they didn't do.

Which, you know, I've, you know, like, I've definitely had that fear before.

And I've gotten judgmental looks from parents for even being male and working.

And while it is healthcare, but we deal with children, so.

Yeah.

I really like the point you made, though, about perhaps guys will find it easier to, funnily enough, empathize with autistic kids who might actually have much more stereotypically male interests and proclivities in terms of even emotional processing and things like that.

That's such an interesting point that I can't say anyone has ever made to me before.

Yeah.

But a lot of the autism community is male.

So, like, I could talk about video games and sports and bikes all day.

My coworkers, probably not as much.

So, I think.

Yeah.

That's a good point.

And that's just the difference.

And not that girls can't do that stuff, but guys are more likely to talk about it and understand it.

And.

Yeah.

Yeah, absolutely.

That's a really interesting point.

Okay.

So, I want to ask, I know I've already taken over an hour of your time.

So, I want to ask, you know, if there's any.

I'm enjoying our conversation.

Don't worry.

Me too.

Very much.

So, I want to know what, if there's anything else you want to tell me about, or what would you want to imagine that you had a sort of national audience?

What would you want to tell people about ABA, about this population that you have been serving?

Ask questions.

Don't be afraid to ask questions if things seem unethical or wrong to you.

It is so important to ask questions.

And even if you know something already, ask questions because you might find something else.

Everyone has a different opinion.

Everyone has a different view on things.

Essentially, in ABA, there's so much you can customize to a client to make it more interesting to them.

And always listen to parents.

I think another good thing about the current clinic I work at is that we use like a daycare app to take pictures of the kids to send to parents and to show that.

So, I think more clinics need to do that as well.

And to be more on top of our parent training and the ethics that we deal with in the field.

I know that was a lot.

That's great.

That was very well put.

Yeah.

Very, very well put.

It also reminded me of something you said earlier about, maybe the parents are the ones who are asking, you know, my kid is hand flapping, people are looking at us where we go out.

And they also need, someone needs to explain to them, like, yeah, it's weird and awkward by the standards prevailing, but for your kid, it's important.

And, you know, if people are looking at you askance, tell them to fuck off or whatever, you know, excuse my language.

Exactly.

Thank you.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Yeah.

I agree.

Empowering parents to ask questions, to know what's going on.

I also want them to ask things like, you know, with the BC, how much time do you spend talking to the RBT?

Do you ask for the RBT's feedback?

Does the RBT, you know, like really find out about that?

Because I just think we can't, you really need to understand how important the RBT's are.

And there's a lot of people who really don't get that.

They just, if you go on the BACB's website, you know, the way they present it is really the RBT's are these exquisitely trained people who can just apply an exquisitely calibrated behavior modification plan.

And it's not that, it just isn't that.

So I really want parents to know that.

And I also think that would put pressure on the clinics, right?

I think there's pressure to want to keep the clients as well.

Like, oh, if we're telling parents that they're not doing something right, we're still afraid of losing them.

Good point.

Very good point.

I think there needs, there's somewhere in the middle that we need to meet between, I'm sure that there's some BCBA's who have mastered that, but in companies that have mastered that middle part, please share the secret because then everyone wins.

Yeah.

Do you think you will have, you'll be interested in sort of running your own clinic or what will you look into when you want to be a, when you get your qualifications?

I'm going to try to stick with this clinic for as long as I can, because I've helped build it out.

Even though we're part of a bigger company, I've really helped build it up from day one.

So, and I really like the BCBA I'm working with at the moment.

She is awesome and amazing and really takes all the ethical concerns that I have into account.

We learn from each other.

That's amazing.

Yeah.

I mean, you are, you know, one in hundreds, but a very small number in hundreds of people that I've talked to who would say something like that.

So yeah, you've got a good thing.

Definitely.

Yeah.

All right.

Is there anything else you want to talk about before I wrap up?

No.

Just feel free to email me wherever else with any more questions I could answer.

And yeah, well, I'm, like I said, I'm going to send you, if you don't mind me keeping your, keeping your email, I will send you our, our report, which will have things like what proportion of the RBTs that we spoke to work on eye contact, work on stimming, use restraint, use aversives, you know, all of those stats that we're collecting will be there.

So I'll certainly share that with you.

But I hope it also will contain a lot more qualitative data.

You know, I really want to present some of the stories that we've been hearing.

So I think a lot of them are very powerful.

So I'll be sharing that with you if you're okay with me keeping your email, but let me just get to the end of the script I got here that we didn't really use because I want to just close us out with the questions about what we can use this transcript for.

Okay.

Yeah.

So the, I want to know if you're comfortable with me using and sharing the anonymized transcript of our interview with other interested parties, for example, researchers at my institution, to be very, very clear with you, like I said, at the beginning, this would never include any details that could be used to identify you.

So do I have your permission to share the anonymized transcript?

Yes.

Thank you.

And what about the audio recording?

Again, it wouldn't include any identifying details.

Yes.

Okay.

Terrific.

Thank you so much for your time today talking to me.

It was an extremely interesting discussion and you've definitely given me a lot to think about.

And I don't know how to put this, but it's kind of weird, but thank you also for what you're doing in the clinics with those kids and with your BCBA.

I think it's been a lot to hear this like endless, nearly endless stream of really horrifying stories.

And it's amazing when I do come across someone like you.

So I don't know if the kids really understand what they're getting in terms of landing at that clinic with you and your BCBA, but yeah, I guess I can, if I, if it even makes sense, I can thank you on their behalf.

It's really, it really means a lot.

Yeah.

Yeah.

Thank you.

All right.

Take care.

And yeah, look out for an email in the fall, if not sooner.

Okay.

Thank you.

Bye.